# Introduction

**vfmd** stands for Vanilla-flavoured Markdown. It formalises the
[original Markdown syntax] as a fully-defined specification. It also adds
a few (arguably minor) modifications to the syntax.

[original Markdown syntax]: http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax

## Background

The [original Markdown syntax] document is a set of loosely defined
guidelines on what the syntax elements in Markdown are, and how they
should be interpreted. The syntax elements defined there constitute the
_base syntax_ of Markdown.

Since the original Markdown was published in 2004, there have been many
different implementations of Markdown, written in different programming
languages, and many different flavours of Markdown, each implementing
additional features or syntax elements.  While all these different
implementations and flavours of Markdown agree on the _base syntax_ as
defined in the [original Markdown], their interpretations have [not
always been consistent][babelmark2], even for just the _base syntax_.
This divergence implies that, unless written very carefully to avoid any
corner cases, a Markdown document is tied to the variant of Markdown
that was used while writing the document.

[original Markdown]: http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax
[babelmark2]: http://johnmacfarlane.net/babelmark2/faq.html

## Purpose

Markdown would be a lot more valuable when different implementations and
flavours agree on the output for all input scenarios, atleast when using
just the _base syntax_.

One of the main reasons why the different variants of Markdown differ in
their behaviour is that there is no real specification for Markdown.  In
the absense of a specification, the developers behind the different
variants of Markdown have interpreted the loosely defined guidelines
specified in [original Markdown syntax] in different ways, thereby
resulting in this divergence.

vfmd attempts to provide a complete spec for the _base syntax_ of
Markdown. vfmd shall clearly define the interpretation (and hence, the
output) for all possible input scenarios, thereby enabling different
Markdown implementations that adopt it to behave consistently in
interpreting the _base syntax_ of Markdown.

## Goals

These are the goals for vfmd:

 1. vfmd shall unambiguously define the interpretation for all input
    scenarios for the _base syntax_ of Markdown
 2. In case any additional syntax elements not covered by the _base
    syntax_ (e.g., fenced code-blocks, footnotes) need to be supported
    by an implementation, vfmd shall define how the handling of the
    custom additional syntax should be integrated with the handling of
    the _base syntax_.

## Guiding Principles

The following are the principles that guide the design of the vfmd
specification, given in the order of their preference:

1. Stick to the goal of the original Markdown: "Make it as readable as
   possible". Keep in mind that "the biggest source of inspiration for
   Markdownâ€™s syntax is the format of plain text email".
2. Make the output rich text structurally resemble the input plain text
3. Any input should be acceptable as valid Markdown
4. Stick to the [original Markdown syntax] as much as possible

